docs/billing/michigan-utility-guide.md, before:

# Michigan Public Utility Multi-Service Billing Guide

## Overview

This guide describes how to use the billing platform to generate bills for Michigan public utilities offering multiple services (electric, water, wastewater, broadband, etc.) with Michigan-specific regulatory surcharges and voluntary contribution programs.

## Architecture

### Multi-Service Billing

The platform supports multi-service billing through:
- **ServiceType** enum: Defines service categories (ELECTRIC, WATER, WASTEWATER, BROADBAND, etc.)
- **MultiServiceBillInput**: Encapsulates meter readings and tariffs for multiple services
- **ServiceMeterReads**: Groups meter readings by service type
- **BillingEngine.calculateMultiServiceBill()**: Core calculation method

### Service Types

Available service types (see `ServiceTypes.kt`):
```kotlin
enum class ServiceType {
    ELECTRIC,      // Electric power service
    WATER,         // Potable water service
    WASTEWATER,    // Sewer/wastewater service
    BROADBAND,     // Internet/telecommunications
    GAS,           // Natural gas service
    REFUSE,        // Trash collection
    RECYCLING,     // Recycling collection
    STORMWATER,    // Stormwater management
    DONATION       // Voluntary contributions
}
```

### Usage Units

Supported usage units for metering:
```kotlin
enum class UsageUnit {
    KWH,          // Kilowatt-hours (electric)
    KW,           // Kilowatts (demand)
    CCF,          // Hundred cubic feet (water/gas)
    GALLONS,      // Gallons (water)
    THERMS,       // Therms (gas)
    MBPS,         // Megabits per second (broadband)
    GB,           // Gigabytes (broadband data)
    CUBIC_YARDS,  // Cubic yards (refuse)
    CONTAINERS,   // Containers (recycling)
    NONE          // No metered usage (flat-rate services)
}
```

## Michigan Regulatory Surcharges

Michigan utilities must apply regulatory surcharges mandated by the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC).

### Electric Service Surcharges

Implemented in `MichiganElectricSurcharges` object:

#### Power Supply Cost Recovery (PSCR)
- **Code**: PSCR
- **Type**: Per-unit charge
- **Default Rate**: $0.00125/kWh
- **Purpose**: Recovers fuel and purchased power costs
- **Regulation**: MPSC approval required; rates adjusted periodically

#### System Access Fee (SAF)
- **Code**: SAF
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $7.00/month
- **Purpose**: Covers distribution system maintenance and operations

#### Low Income Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
- **Code**: LIHEAP
- **Type**: Percentage of energy charges
- **Default Rate**: 0.5%
- **Purpose**: Funds assistance programs for low-income customers

#### Energy Optimization (EO)
- **Code**: EO
- **Type**: Percentage of energy charges
- **Default Rate**: 2.0%
- **Purpose**: Funds energy efficiency and conservation programs

#### Renewable Energy Standard (RES)
- **Code**: RES
- **Type**: Per-unit charge
- **Default Rate**: $0.0005/kWh
- **Purpose**: Supports renewable energy development

### Water and Wastewater Surcharges

Implemented in `MichiganWaterSurcharges` object:

#### Infrastructure Improvement Charge
- **Code**: INFRA
- **Type**: Percentage of total charges
- **Default Rate**: 2.0%
- **Purpose**: Funds water/sewer infrastructure upgrades
- **Applies To**: WATER, WASTEWATER

#### Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR)
- **Code**: LSLR
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $3.00/month
- **Purpose**: Funds lead pipe replacement programs
- **Applies To**: WATER

#### Stormwater Management Fee
- **Code**: STORM
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $5.00/month
- **Purpose**: Funds stormwater infrastructure
- **Applies To**: WASTEWATER, STORMWATER

## Voluntary Contributions

Utilities can offer optional voluntary contribution programs.

### Contribution Programs

Available programs (see `ContributionProgram` enum):
- **ENERGY_ASSISTANCE**: Low-income energy assistance
- **TREE_PLANTING**: Urban forestry and tree planting
- **RENEWABLE_ENERGY**: Renewable energy development
- **LOW_INCOME_SUPPORT**: General customer support
- **COMMUNITY_FUND**: Community improvement
- **CONSERVATION**: Environmental conservation
- **EDUCATION**: Customer education and outreach
- **OTHER**: Other programs

### Example

```kotlin
val contributions = listOf(
    VoluntaryContribution(
        code = "ENERGY_ASSIST",
        description = "Energy Assistance Program",
        amount = Money(500),  // $5.00
        program = ContributionProgram.ENERGY_ASSISTANCE
    )
)
```

## Example: Michigan Multi-Service Bill

### Scenario

Residential customer with:
- Electric service: 800 kWh usage
- Water service: 15 CCF usage
- Wastewater service: 15 CCF usage (typically equals water usage)
- Broadband service: 100 Mbps plan (flat rate, no metered usage)
- $5.00 voluntary donation to energy assistance

### Code Example

```kotlin
// Electric: 800 kWh with tiered rates
val electricReads = ServiceMeterReads(
    serviceType = ServiceType.ELECTRIC,
    reads = listOf(
        MeterReadPair(
            meterId = "ELEC-001",
            serviceType = ServiceType.ELECTRIC,
            usageType = UsageUnit.KWH,
            startRead = MeterRead("ELEC-001", ServiceType.ELECTRIC, 45200.0, 
                LocalDate.of(2025, 12, 1), UsageUnit.KWH),
            endRead = MeterRead("ELEC-001", ServiceType.ELECTRIC, 46000.0, 
                LocalDate.of(2025, 12, 31), UsageUnit.KWH)
        )
    )
)

// Electric tariff: Tiered residential rate
val electricTariff = RateTariff.TieredRate(
    customerCharge = Money(1500),  // $15.00/month
    tiers = listOf(
        RateTier(maxUsage = 500.0, ratePerUnit = Money(10)),  // $0.10/kWh ≤ 500
        RateTier(maxUsage = null, ratePerUnit = Money(12))     // $0.12/kWh > 500
    ),
    unit = "kWh"
)

// Michigan regulatory surcharges
val surcharges = listOf(
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.powerSupplyCostRecovery(),
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.systemAccessFee(),
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.liheapSurcharge(),
    MichiganWaterSurcharges.infrastructureCharge()
)

// Voluntary contribution
val contributions = listOf(
    VoluntaryContribution(
        code = "ENERGY_ASSIST",
        description = "Energy Assistance Program",
        amount = Money(500),
        program = ContributionProgram.ENERGY_ASSISTANCE
    )
)

val input = MultiServiceBillInput(
    billId = BillId("BILL-202512-12345"),
    billRunId = BillRunId("RUN-202512"),
    utilityId = UtilityId("michigan-utility-001"),
    customerId = CustomerId("customer-12345"),
    billPeriod = billPeriod,
    serviceReads = listOf(electricReads, waterReads, wastewaterReads, broadbandReads),
    serviceTariffs = mapOf(
        ServiceType.ELECTRIC to electricTariff,
        ServiceType.WATER to waterTariff,
        ServiceType.WASTEWATER to wastewaterTariff,
        ServiceType.BROADBAND to broadbandTariff
    ),
    accountBalance = AccountBalance.zero(),
    regulatorySurcharges = surcharges,
    contributions = contributions
)

val result = BillingEngine.calculateMultiServiceBill(input)
```

### Expected Bill Breakdown

```
Electric Service:
  Customer Charge              $15.00
  Usage (500 kWh @ $0.10)     $50.00
  Usage (300 kWh @ $0.12)     $36.00
  PSCR (800 kWh @ $0.00125)    $1.00
  SAF                          $7.00
  LIHEAP (0.5% of usage)       $0.43
  --------------------------------
  Electric Subtotal          $109.43

Water Service:
  Customer Charge              $8.00
  Usage (15 CCF @ $3.50)      $52.50
  INFRA (2% of subtotal)       $1.21
  LSLR                         $3.00
  --------------------------------
  Water Subtotal              $64.71

Wastewater Service:
  Customer Charge              $8.00
  Usage (15 CCF @ $4.00)      $60.00
  INFRA (2% of subtotal)       $1.36
  STORM                        $5.00
  --------------------------------
  Wastewater Subtotal         $74.36

Broadband Service:
  Monthly Service (100 Mbps)  $49.99
  --------------------------------
  Broadband Subtotal          $49.99

Voluntary Contributions:
  Energy Assistance            $5.00
  --------------------------------

TOTAL AMOUNT DUE             $303.49
```

## Demo Endpoint

Test the Michigan multi-service billing via the demo HTTP endpoint:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/demo/michigan-multi-service-bill
```

This returns a complete BillResult JSON with all service charges, regulatory surcharges, and contributions calculated.

## Testing

Comprehensive test coverage is provided:

### Unit Tests
- `MichiganMultiServiceBillTest`: Multi-service billing scenarios
- `MichiganRegulatoryChargesTest`: Surcharge configuration validation
- `VoluntaryContributionTest`: Contribution model tests

### Running Tests
```bash
./gradlew :billing-domain:test --tests "*Michigan*"
```

## References

- [Michigan Public Service Commission](https://www.michigan.gov/mpsc)
- [MPSC Electric Rate Cases](https://mi-psc.my.site.com/sfc/#version?selectedDocumentId=0692X000001n1lx)
- [Michigan Energy Optimization Programs](https://www.michigan.gov/mpsc/consumer/electricity/energy-efficiency)
- [Lead and Copper Rule](https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/lead-and-copper-rule)

Commit message:

Rename customerCharge to readinessToServeCharge for utility billing accuracy
- Renamed customerCharge field to readinessToServeCharge in all RateTariff types (FlatRate, TieredRate, TimeOfUseRate, DemandRate)
- Renamed ChargeCategory.CUSTOMER_CHARGE to ChargeCategory.READINESS_TO_SERVE
- Updated BillingEngine to use new field names and charge codes (READINESS_TO_SERVE)
- Updated charge descriptions from 'Customer Charge' to 'Readiness to Serve'
- Updated all tests (MichiganMultiServiceBillTest) with new terminology
- Updated demo controllers (DemoBillingController, MichiganUtilityDemoController)
- Updated documentation (michigan-utility-guide.md) to reflect proper utility industry terminology

'Readiness to Serve' is the standard utility industry term for the fixed monthly charge that covers the cost of maintaining service infrastructure and availability, regardless of usage.

All tests passing (24 Michigan tests + core billing tests)

Co-Authored-By: Warp <agent@warp.dev>

docs/billing/michigan-utility-guide.md, after:

# Michigan Public Utility Multi-Service Billing Guide

## Overview

This guide describes how to use the billing platform to generate bills for Michigan public utilities offering multiple services (electric, water, wastewater, broadband, etc.) with Michigan-specific regulatory surcharges and voluntary contribution programs.

## Architecture

### Multi-Service Billing

The platform supports multi-service billing through:
- **ServiceType** enum: Defines service categories (ELECTRIC, WATER, WASTEWATER, BROADBAND, etc.)
- **MultiServiceBillInput**: Encapsulates meter readings and tariffs for multiple services
- **ServiceMeterReads**: Groups meter readings by service type
- **BillingEngine.calculateMultiServiceBill()**: Core calculation method

### Service Types

Available service types (see `ServiceTypes.kt`):
```kotlin
enum class ServiceType {
    ELECTRIC,      // Electric power service
    WATER,         // Potable water service
    WASTEWATER,    // Sewer/wastewater service
    BROADBAND,     // Internet/telecommunications
    GAS,           // Natural gas service
    REFUSE,        // Trash collection
    RECYCLING,     // Recycling collection
    STORMWATER,    // Stormwater management
    DONATION       // Voluntary contributions
}
```

### Usage Units

Supported usage units for metering:
```kotlin
enum class UsageUnit {
    KWH,          // Kilowatt-hours (electric)
    KW,           // Kilowatts (demand)
    CCF,          // Hundred cubic feet (water/gas)
    GALLONS,      // Gallons (water)
    THERMS,       // Therms (gas)
    MBPS,         // Megabits per second (broadband)
    GB,           // Gigabytes (broadband data)
    CUBIC_YARDS,  // Cubic yards (refuse)
    CONTAINERS,   // Containers (recycling)
    NONE          // No metered usage (flat-rate services)
}
```

## Michigan Regulatory Surcharges

Michigan utilities must apply regulatory surcharges mandated by the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC).

### Electric Service Surcharges

Implemented in `MichiganElectricSurcharges` object:

#### Power Supply Cost Recovery (PSCR)
- **Code**: PSCR
- **Type**: Per-unit charge
- **Default Rate**: $0.00125/kWh
- **Purpose**: Recovers fuel and purchased power costs
- **Regulation**: MPSC approval required; rates adjusted periodically

#### System Access Fee (SAF)
- **Code**: SAF
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $7.00/month
- **Purpose**: Covers distribution system maintenance and operations

#### Low Income Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
- **Code**: LIHEAP
- **Type**: Percentage of energy charges
- **Default Rate**: 0.5%
- **Purpose**: Funds assistance programs for low-income customers

#### Energy Optimization (EO)
- **Code**: EO
- **Type**: Percentage of energy charges
- **Default Rate**: 2.0%
- **Purpose**: Funds energy efficiency and conservation programs

#### Renewable Energy Standard (RES)
- **Code**: RES
- **Type**: Per-unit charge
- **Default Rate**: $0.0005/kWh
- **Purpose**: Supports renewable energy development

### Water and Wastewater Surcharges

Implemented in `MichiganWaterSurcharges` object:

#### Infrastructure Improvement Charge
- **Code**: INFRA
- **Type**: Percentage of total charges
- **Default Rate**: 2.0%
- **Purpose**: Funds water/sewer infrastructure upgrades
- **Applies To**: WATER, WASTEWATER

#### Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR)
- **Code**: LSLR
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $3.00/month
- **Purpose**: Funds lead pipe replacement programs
- **Applies To**: WATER

#### Stormwater Management Fee
- **Code**: STORM
- **Type**: Fixed monthly charge
- **Default Amount**: $5.00/month
- **Purpose**: Funds stormwater infrastructure
- **Applies To**: WASTEWATER, STORMWATER

## Voluntary Contributions

Utilities can offer optional voluntary contribution programs.

### Contribution Programs

Available programs (see `ContributionProgram` enum):
- **ENERGY_ASSISTANCE**: Low-income energy assistance
- **TREE_PLANTING**: Urban forestry and tree planting
- **RENEWABLE_ENERGY**: Renewable energy development
- **LOW_INCOME_SUPPORT**: General customer support
- **COMMUNITY_FUND**: Community improvement
- **CONSERVATION**: Environmental conservation
- **EDUCATION**: Customer education and outreach
- **OTHER**: Other programs

### Example

```kotlin
val contributions = listOf(
    VoluntaryContribution(
        code = "ENERGY_ASSIST",
        description = "Energy Assistance Program",
        amount = Money(500),  // $5.00
        program = ContributionProgram.ENERGY_ASSISTANCE
    )
)
```

## Example: Michigan Multi-Service Bill

### Scenario

Residential customer with:
- Electric service: 800 kWh usage
- Water service: 15 CCF usage
- Wastewater service: 15 CCF usage (typically equals water usage)
- Broadband service: 100 Mbps plan (flat rate, no metered usage)
- $5.00 voluntary donation to energy assistance

### Code Example

```kotlin
// Electric: 800 kWh with tiered rates
val electricReads = ServiceMeterReads(
    serviceType = ServiceType.ELECTRIC,
    reads = listOf(
        MeterReadPair(
            meterId = "ELEC-001",
            serviceType = ServiceType.ELECTRIC,
            usageType = UsageUnit.KWH,
            startRead = MeterRead("ELEC-001", ServiceType.ELECTRIC, 45200.0, 
                LocalDate.of(2025, 12, 1), UsageUnit.KWH),
            endRead = MeterRead("ELEC-001", ServiceType.ELECTRIC, 46000.0, 
                LocalDate.of(2025, 12, 31), UsageUnit.KWH)
        )
    )
)

// Electric tariff: Tiered residential rate
val electricTariff = RateTariff.TieredRate(
    readinessToServeCharge = Money(1500),  // $15.00/month
    tiers = listOf(
        RateTier(maxUsage = 500.0, ratePerUnit = Money(10)),  // $0.10/kWh ≤ 500
        RateTier(maxUsage = null, ratePerUnit = Money(12))     // $0.12/kWh > 500
    ),
    unit = "kWh"
)

// Michigan regulatory surcharges
val surcharges = listOf(
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.powerSupplyCostRecovery(),
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.systemAccessFee(),
    MichiganElectricSurcharges.liheapSurcharge(),
    MichiganWaterSurcharges.infrastructureCharge()
)

// Voluntary contribution
val contributions = listOf(
    VoluntaryContribution(
        code = "ENERGY_ASSIST",
        description = "Energy Assistance Program",
        amount = Money(500),
        program = ContributionProgram.ENERGY_ASSISTANCE
    )
)

val input = MultiServiceBillInput(
    billId = BillId("BILL-202512-12345"),
    billRunId = BillRunId("RUN-202512"),
    utilityId = UtilityId("michigan-utility-001"),
    customerId = CustomerId("customer-12345"),
    billPeriod = billPeriod,
    serviceReads = listOf(electricReads, waterReads, wastewaterReads, broadbandReads),
    serviceTariffs = mapOf(
        ServiceType.ELECTRIC to electricTariff,
        ServiceType.WATER to waterTariff,
        ServiceType.WASTEWATER to wastewaterTariff,
        ServiceType.BROADBAND to broadbandTariff
    ),
    accountBalance = AccountBalance.zero(),
    regulatorySurcharges = surcharges,
    contributions = contributions
)

val result = BillingEngine.calculateMultiServiceBill(input)
```

### Expected Bill Breakdown

```
Electric Service:
  Readiness to Serve              $15.00
  Usage (500 kWh @ $0.10)     $50.00
  Usage (300 kWh @ $0.12)     $36.00
  PSCR (800 kWh @ $0.00125)    $1.00
  SAF                          $7.00
  LIHEAP (0.5% of usage)       $0.43
  --------------------------------
  Electric Subtotal          $109.43

Water Service:
  Readiness to Serve              $8.00
  Usage (15 CCF @ $3.50)      $52.50
  INFRA (2% of subtotal)       $1.21
  LSLR                         $3.00
  --------------------------------
  Water Subtotal              $64.71

Wastewater Service:
  Readiness to Serve              $8.00
  Usage (15 CCF @ $4.00)      $60.00
  INFRA (2% of subtotal)       $1.36
  STORM                        $5.00
  --------------------------------
  Wastewater Subtotal         $74.36

Broadband Service:
  Monthly Service (100 Mbps)  $49.99
  --------------------------------
  Broadband Subtotal          $49.99

Voluntary Contributions:
  Energy Assistance            $5.00
  --------------------------------

TOTAL AMOUNT DUE             $303.49
```

## Demo Endpoint

Test the Michigan multi-service billing via the demo HTTP endpoint:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/demo/michigan-multi-service-bill
```

This returns a complete BillResult JSON with all service charges, regulatory surcharges, and contributions calculated.

## Testing

Comprehensive test coverage is provided:

### Unit Tests
- `MichiganMultiServiceBillTest`: Multi-service billing scenarios
- `MichiganRegulatoryChargesTest`: Surcharge configuration validation
- `VoluntaryContributionTest`: Contribution model tests

### Running Tests
```bash
./gradlew :billing-domain:test --tests "*Michigan*"
```

## References

- [Michigan Public Service Commission](https://www.michigan.gov/mpsc)
- [MPSC Electric Rate Cases](https://mi-psc.my.site.com/sfc/#version?selectedDocumentId=0692X000001n1lx)
- [Michigan Energy Optimization Programs](https://www.michigan.gov/mpsc/consumer/electricity/energy-efficiency)
- [Lead and Copper Rule](https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/lead-and-copper-rule)
